---
title: "Selection of bacterial mutants in late infections: when vector transmission trades off against growth advantage in stationary phase"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
venue: '*mBio*'
authors:
- admin
- Nathalie Parthuisot*
- Sylvie Pagès
- Anne Lanois
- Alain Givaudan
- Jean-Baptiste Ferdy
tags: []
categories: []
date: '2019-10-01'
url_pdf: http://mbio.asm.org/content/10/5/e01437-19.abstract
doi: 10.1128/mBio.01437-19
citation: 'Your Name, You. (2009). &quot;Paper Title Number 1.&quot; <i>Journal 1</i>. 1(1).'
---

Bacterial infections are often composed of cells with distinct phenotypes
  that can be produced by genetic or epigenetic mechanisms. This phenotypic heterogeneity
  has proved to be important in many pathogens, because it can alter both pathogenicity
  and transmission. We studied how and why it can emerge during infection in the bacterium
  *Xenorhabdus nematophila*, a pathogen that kills insects and multiplies in the cadaver
  before being transmitted by the soil nematode vector *Steinernema carpocapsae*. We
  found that phenotypic variants cluster in three groups, one of which is composed
  of *lrp* defective mutants. These mutants, together with variants of another group,
  have in common that they maintain high survival during late stationary phase. This
  probably explains why they increase in frequency: variants of *X. nematophila* with
  a growth advantage in stationary phase (GASP) are under strong positive selection
  both in prolonged culture and in late infections. We also found that the within-host
  advantage of these variants seems to trade off against transmission by nematode
  vectors: the variants that reach the highest load in insects are those that are
  the least transmitted.**IMPORTANCE**: Pathogens can evolve inside their host, and the
  importance of this mutation-fueled process is increasingly recognized. A disease
  outcome may indeed depend in part on pathogen adaptations that emerge during infection.
  It is therefore important to document these adaptations and the conditions that
  drive them. In our study, we took advantage of the possibility to monitor within-host
  evolution in the insect pathogen *X. nematophila*. We demonstrated that selection
  occurring in aged infection favors *lrp* defective mutants, because these metabolic
  mutants benefit from a growth advantage in stationary phase (GASP). We also demonstrated
  that these mutants have reduced virulence and impaired transmission, modifying the
  infection outcome. Beyond the specific case of *X. nematophila*, we propose that metabolic
  mutants are to be found in other bacterial pathogens that stay for many generations
  inside their host.'
